docs/sdk-overview.md, before:

# ElasticDash SDKs

ElasticDash provides fully-typed SDKs for instrumenting your LLM applications and sending traces to the ElasticDash Logger.

- **Python** - `elasticdash` package on PyPI
- **JavaScript/TypeScript** - Modular packages under `@elasticdash/*` on npm

The ElasticDash SDKs are the recommended way to create traces and observations in your LLM applications for testing and evaluation.

---

## What Do the SDKs Do?

The ElasticDash SDKs enable you to:

1. **Instrument your application** - Capture traces of LLM calls, tool executions, and custom logic
2. **Record observations** - Track individual steps like model generations, retrievals, and events
3. **Add metadata** - Attach user IDs, session IDs, tags, and custom metadata to traces
4. **Async tracing** - Send traces in the background without adding latency to your application
5. **Automatic nesting** - Create hierarchical traces that show parent-child relationships

**Key Benefits:**

- Built on [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) standard
- Fully async requests (no latency impact)
- Accurate latency tracking with synchronous timestamps
- Type-safe APIs with IntelliSense support
- Automatic error handling (SDK errors won't break your app)
- Compatible with popular frameworks (OpenAI, LangChain, etc.)

---

## Quick Start

### Python SDK

**1. Install package:**

```bash
pip install elasticdash
```

**2. Add credentials:**

```bash
# .env file
ELASTICDASH_SECRET_KEY="sk-ed-..."
ELASTICDASH_PUBLIC_KEY="pk-ed-..."
ELASTICDASH_BASE_URL="https://logger.your-elasticdash.com"
```

**3. Instrument your application:**

```python
from elasticdash import get_client

# Initialize client
elasticdash = get_client()

# Create a span using context manager
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="span",
    name="process-user-query"
) as span:
    # Your processing logic
    span.update(input="User question", output="Processing started")

    # Create nested generation for LLM call
    with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
        as_type="generation",
        name="gpt-4-completion",
        model="gpt-4"
    ) as generation:
        # Your LLM call here
        generation.update(
            input={"prompt": "What is the capital of France?"},
            output={"response": "The capital of France is Paris."},
            usage={"prompt_tokens": 10, "completion_tokens": 8}
        )

# Flush events (required for short-lived apps)
elasticdash.flush()
```

**4. See your trace in ElasticDash Logger**

Navigate to your ElasticDash Logger UI to view the captured trace.

---

### JavaScript/TypeScript SDK

**1. Install packages:**

```bash
npm install @elasticdash/tracing @elasticdash/otel @opentelemetry/sdk-node
```

**2. Set environment variables:**

```bash
# .env file
ELASTICDASH_SECRET_KEY="sk-ed-..."
ELASTICDASH_PUBLIC_KEY="pk-ed-..."
ELASTICDASH_BASE_URL="https://logger.your-elasticdash.com"
```

**3. Initialize OpenTelemetry:**

Create an `instrumentation.ts` file:

```typescript
import { NodeSDK } from "@opentelemetry/sdk-node";
import { ElasticDashSpanProcessor } from "@elasticdash/otel";

export const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  spanProcessors: [new ElasticDashSpanProcessor()],
});

sdk.start();
```

**4. Instrument your application:**

```typescript
import "./instrumentation"; // Must be first import
import { startActiveObservation } from "@elasticdash/tracing";

async function main() {
  await startActiveObservation("user-query-trace", async (span) => {
    span.update({
      input: { query: "What is the capital of France?" },
      output: { answer: "Paris" },
    });
  });
}

// Shutdown flushes events (required for short-lived apps)
main().finally(() => sdk.shutdown());
```

**5. Run and see your trace:**

```bash
npx tsx index.ts
```

---

## Installation

### Python SDK

Install the ElasticDash Python SDK from PyPI:

```bash
pip install elasticdash
```

**Requirements:**
- Python 3.8 or higher
- Compatible with async/await patterns

### JavaScript/TypeScript SDK

The ElasticDash JS/TS SDK is modular. Install the packages you need:

**Basic tracing setup:**

```bash
npm install @elasticdash/tracing @elasticdash/otel @opentelemetry/sdk-node
```

**All available packages:**

| Package | Description | Environment |
|---------|-------------|-------------|
| **`@elasticdash/core`** | Core utilities, types, and logger shared across packages | Universal JS |
| **`@elasticdash/client`** | Client for querying traces, sessions, and scores | Universal JS |
| **`@elasticdash/tracing`** | Core OpenTelemetry-based tracing functions | Universal JS |
| **`@elasticdash/otel`** | `ElasticDashSpanProcessor` to export traces to Logger | Node.js ≥ 20 |
| **`@elasticdash/openai`** | Automatic tracing for OpenAI SDK | Universal JS |
| **`@elasticdash/langchain`** | CallbackHandler for LangChain applications | Universal JS |

**Install specific integrations:**

```bash
# For OpenAI integration
npm install @elasticdash/openai

# For LangChain integration
npm install @elasticdash/langchain

# For querying data
npm install @elasticdash/client
```

---

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

Both SDKs support configuration via environment variables:

```bash
# Required
ELASTICDASH_PUBLIC_KEY="pk-ed-..."
ELASTICDASH_SECRET_KEY="sk-ed-..."

# Required for self-hosted Logger
ELASTICDASH_BASE_URL="https://logger.your-elasticdash.com"
```

### Python: Client Initialization

**Using environment variables (recommended):**

```python
from elasticdash import get_client

# Automatically uses environment variables
elasticdash = get_client()

# Verify connection
if elasticdash.auth_check():
    print("ElasticDash client authenticated!")
else:
    print("Authentication failed")
```

**Using constructor:**

```python
from elasticdash import ElasticDash

elasticdash = ElasticDash(
    public_key="pk-ed-...",
    secret_key="sk-ed-...",
    base_url="https://logger.your-elasticdash.com"
)
```

The ElasticDash client is a singleton. Access it anywhere with `get_client()`.

### JavaScript/TypeScript: Client Initialization

**Using environment variables:**

```typescript
import { ElasticDashClient } from "@elasticdash/client";

// Automatically uses environment variables
const elasticdash = new ElasticDashClient();
```

**Using constructor:**

```typescript
import { ElasticDashClient } from "@elasticdash/client";

const elasticdash = new ElasticDashClient({
  publicKey: "pk-ed-...",
  secretKey: "sk-ed-...",
  baseUrl: "https://logger.your-elasticdash.com"
});
```

---

## Basic Usage

### Creating Traces

**Python:**

```python
from elasticdash import get_client

elasticdash = get_client()

# Context manager (recommended)
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="span",
    name="my-operation"
) as span:
    span.update(
        input="Input data",
        output="Output data",
        metadata={"user": "alice"}
    )
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import { startActiveObservation } from "@elasticdash/tracing";

await startActiveObservation("my-operation", async (span) => {
  span.update({
    input: "Input data",
    output: "Output data",
    metadata: { user: "alice" }
  });
});
```

### Recording LLM Generations

**Python:**

```python
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="generation",
    name="gpt-4-call",
    model="gpt-4"
) as generation:
    # Your OpenAI call
    response = openai_client.chat.completions.create(
        model="gpt-4",
        messages=[{"role": "user", "content": "Hello"}]
    )

    generation.update(
        input={"messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "Hello"}]},
        output={"content": response.choices[0].message.content},
        usage={
            "prompt_tokens": response.usage.prompt_tokens,
            "completion_tokens": response.usage.completion_tokens,
            "total_tokens": response.usage.total_tokens
        }
    )
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import { startObservation } from "@elasticdash/tracing";

const generation = startObservation(
  "gpt-4-call",
  {
    model: "gpt-4",
    input: { messages: [{ role: "user", content: "Hello" }] }
  },
  { asType: "generation" }
);

// Your OpenAI call
const response = await openai.chat.completions.create({
  model: "gpt-4",
  messages: [{ role: "user", content: "Hello" }]
});

generation.update({
  output: { content: response.choices[0].message.content },
  usage: {
    promptTokens: response.usage.prompt_tokens,
    completionTokens: response.usage.completion_tokens
  }
}).end();
```

### Nested Observations

**Python:**

```python
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="span",
    name="parent-operation"
) as parent:

    # Child observation 1
    with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
        as_type="span",
        name="child-1"
    ) as child1:
        child1.update(output="Child 1 complete")

    # Child observation 2
    with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
        as_type="generation",
        name="child-2",
        model="gpt-4"
    ) as child2:
        child2.update(output="Child 2 complete")

    parent.update(output="Parent complete")
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
await startActiveObservation("parent-operation", async (parent) => {

  // Child observation 1
  const child1 = startObservation("child-1", {}, { asType: "span" });
  child1.update({ output: "Child 1 complete" }).end();

  // Child observation 2
  const child2 = startObservation(
    "child-2",
    { model: "gpt-4" },
    { asType: "generation" }
  );
  child2.update({ output: "Child 2 complete" }).end();

  parent.update({ output: "Parent complete" });
});
```

### Adding Metadata and Tags

**Python:**

```python
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="span",
    name="operation",
    user_id="user-123",
    session_id="session-456",
    tags=["production", "experiment-A"],
    metadata={
        "customer_tier": "premium",
        "region": "us-east-1"
    }
) as span:
    span.update(output="Complete")
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
await startActiveObservation("operation", async (span) => {
  span.update({
    userId: "user-123",
    sessionId: "session-456",
    tags: ["production", "experiment-A"],
    metadata: {
      customerTier: "premium",
      region: "us-east-1"
    },
    output: "Complete"
  });
});
```

---

## Flushing Events

For short-lived applications (scripts, serverless functions), you must flush events before the process exits to ensure all traces are sent.

**Python:**

```python
from elasticdash import get_client

elasticdash = get_client()

# Your tracing code here
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="span",
    name="script-task"
) as span:
    span.update(output="Task complete")

# Flush before exit (blocks until all events sent)
elasticdash.flush()
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import { sdk } from "./instrumentation";
import { startActiveObservation } from "@elasticdash/tracing";

async function main() {
  await startActiveObservation("script-task", async (span) => {
    span.update({ output: "Task complete" });
  });
}

// Shutdown before exit (flushes all events)
main().finally(() => sdk.shutdown());
```

**When to flush:**
- ✅ Scripts and CLI tools
- ✅ Serverless functions (Lambda, Cloud Functions)
- ✅ Batch jobs and cron tasks
- ❌ Long-running servers (automatic background flushing)

---

## Framework Integrations

### OpenAI SDK Integration

**Python:**

```python
from elasticdash.openai import openai

# Use the wrapped OpenAI client (drop-in replacement)
completion = openai.chat.completions.create(
    name="chat-completion",
    model="gpt-4",
    messages=[{"role": "user", "content": "Hello"}],
    metadata={"user_id": "alice"}
)

# Automatically traced in ElasticDash!
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import OpenAI from "openai";
import { observeOpenAI } from "@elasticdash/openai";

// Wrap your OpenAI client
const openai = observeOpenAI(new OpenAI());

// Use normally - automatically traced
const response = await openai.chat.completions.create({
  model: "gpt-4",
  messages: [{ role: "user", content: "Hello" }]
});
```

### LangChain Integration

**Python:**

```python
from elasticdash.langchain import CallbackHandler
from langchain_openai import ChatOpenAI
from langchain_core.prompts import ChatPromptTemplate

# Initialize callback handler
elasticdash_handler = CallbackHandler()

# Use with LangChain
llm = ChatOpenAI(model_name="gpt-4")
prompt = ChatPromptTemplate.from_template("Tell me about {topic}")
chain = prompt | llm

response = chain.invoke(
    {"topic": "machine learning"},
    config={"callbacks": [elasticdash_handler]}
)
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import { CallbackHandler } from "@elasticdash/langchain";
import { ChatOpenAI } from "@langchain/openai";

// Initialize callback handler
const elasticdashHandler = new CallbackHandler();

// Use with LangChain
const llm = new ChatOpenAI({ model: "gpt-4" });

const response = await llm.invoke(
  [{ role: "user", content: "Tell me about machine learning" }],
  { callbacks: [elasticdashHandler] }
);
```

---

## OpenTelemetry Foundation

ElasticDash SDKs are built on [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/), providing:

- **Standardization** with the observability ecosystem
- **Context propagation** for nested spans across async workloads
- **Attribute propagation** for metadata, tags, user IDs, etc.
- **Interoperability** with third-party OTel instrumentations

**Mapping:**

| OpenTelemetry | ElasticDash |
|---------------|-------------|
| OTel Trace | ElasticDash Trace |
| OTel Span | ElasticDash Observation (Span/Generation/Event) |
| Span Attributes | Trace/Observation metadata, tags, user_id |

---

## Advanced Features

### Querying Data via SDK

**Python:**

```python
from elasticdash import get_client

elasticdash = get_client()

# Fetch traces
traces = elasticdash.api.trace.list(
    user_id="user-123",
    limit=100
)

# Fetch single trace
trace = elasticdash.api.trace.get("trace-id-abc")

# Fetch observations
observations = elasticdash.api.observations_v_2.get_many(
    trace_id="trace-id-abc",
    type="GENERATION"
)
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import { ElasticDashClient } from "@elasticdash/client";

const elasticdash = new ElasticDashClient();

// Fetch traces
const traces = await elasticdash.api.trace.list({
  userId: "user-123",
  limit: 100
});

// Fetch single trace
const trace = await elasticdash.api.trace.get("trace-id-abc");

// Fetch observations
const observations = await elasticdash.api.observationsV2.getMany({
  traceId: "trace-id-abc",
  type: "GENERATION"
});
```

### Custom Observation Types

**Python:**

```python
# Record an event (point in time, no duration)
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="event",
    name="cache-hit"
) as event:
    event.update(metadata={"cache_key": "user-123-query"})
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
// Record an event
const event = startObservation(
  "cache-hit",
  { metadata: { cacheKey: "user-123-query" } },
  { asType: "event" }
);
event.end();
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Authentication Errors

**Problem:** SDK cannot connect to ElasticDash Logger

**Solution:**

```python
# Python: Check authentication
from elasticdash import get_client

elasticdash = get_client()
if not elasticdash.auth_check():
    print("Check your credentials and base URL")
```

### Traces Not Appearing

**Problem:** Traces not visible in Logger UI

**Solutions:**

1. **Flush events** in short-lived apps:
   ```python
   elasticdash.flush()  # Python
   ```
   ```typescript
   sdk.shutdown()  // TypeScript
   ```

2. **Check base URL** - Ensure `ELASTICDASH_BASE_URL` points to your Logger

3. **Wait 15-30 seconds** - Data may take time to process

### Import Errors (TypeScript)

**Problem:** Cannot find module `@elasticdash/tracing`

**Solution:** Ensure OpenTelemetry SDK is installed:

```bash
npm install @opentelemetry/sdk-node
```

---

## See Also

- [Data Model Reference](./data-model.md) - Understanding traces, sessions, observations
- [Fetching Data](./fetching-data.md) - Query Logger for traces and sessions
- [Architecture Overview](./architecture.md) - How ElasticDash components work together

Commit message:

Update documentation for ElasticDash SDKs and fetching data guidelines

docs/sdk-overview.md, after:

# ElasticDash SDKs

ElasticDash provides fully-typed SDKs for instrumenting your LLM applications and sending traces to the ElasticDash Logger.

- **Python** - `elasticdash` package on PyPI
- **JavaScript/TypeScript** - Modular packages under `@elasticdash/*` on npm

The ElasticDash SDKs are the recommended way to create traces and observations in your LLM applications for tracing LLM behaviours. **We do not recommend using the SDK to fetch traces or perform evaluation directly.**

---

## What Do the SDKs Do?

The ElasticDash SDKs enable you to:

1. **Instrument your application** - Capture traces of LLM calls, tool executions, and custom logic
2. **Record observations** - Track individual steps like model generations, retrievals, and events
3. **Add metadata** - Attach user IDs, session IDs, tags, and custom metadata to traces
4. **Async tracing** - Send traces in the background without adding latency to your application
5. **Automatic nesting** - Create hierarchical traces that show parent-child relationships

**Key Benefits:**

- Built on [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) standard
- Fully async requests (no latency impact)
- Accurate latency tracking with synchronous timestamps
- Type-safe APIs with IntelliSense support
- Automatic error handling (SDK errors won't break your app)
- Compatible with popular frameworks (OpenAI, LangChain, etc.)

**Note:** The SDK is not intended for fetching traces or performing evaluation. Once traces are sent, they will be evaluated and shown on your dashboard. Use the dashboard to check your traces, test cases, and test runs.

---

## Quick Start

### Python SDK

**1. Install package:**

```bash
pip install elasticdash
```

**2. Add credentials:**

```bash
# .env file
ELASTICDASH_SECRET_KEY="sk-ed-..."
ELASTICDASH_PUBLIC_KEY="pk-ed-..."
ELASTICDASH_BASE_URL="https://logger.your-elasticdash.com"
```

**3. Instrument your application:**

```python
from elasticdash import get_client

# Initialize client
elasticdash = get_client()

# Create a span using context manager
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="span",
    name="process-user-query"
) as span:
    # Your processing logic
    span.update(input="User question", output="Processing started")

    # Create nested generation for LLM call
    with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
        as_type="generation",
        name="gpt-4-completion",
        model="gpt-4"
    ) as generation:
        # Your LLM call here
        generation.update(
            input={"prompt": "What is the capital of France?"},
            output={"response": "The capital of France is Paris."},
            usage={"prompt_tokens": 10, "completion_tokens": 8}
        )

# Flush events (required for short-lived apps)
elasticdash.flush()
```

**4. See your trace in ElasticDash Logger**

Navigate to your ElasticDash Logger UI to view the captured trace.

---

### JavaScript/TypeScript SDK

**1. Install packages:**

```bash
npm install @elasticdash/tracing @elasticdash/otel @opentelemetry/sdk-node
```

**2. Set environment variables:**

```bash
# .env file
ELASTICDASH_SECRET_KEY="sk-ed-..."
ELASTICDASH_PUBLIC_KEY="pk-ed-..."
ELASTICDASH_BASE_URL="https://logger.your-elasticdash.com"
```

**3. Initialize OpenTelemetry:**

Create an `instrumentation.ts` file:

```typescript
import { NodeSDK } from "@opentelemetry/sdk-node";
import { ElasticDashSpanProcessor } from "@elasticdash/otel";

export const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  spanProcessors: [new ElasticDashSpanProcessor()],
});

sdk.start();
```

**4. Instrument your application:**

```typescript
import "./instrumentation"; // Must be first import
import { startActiveObservation } from "@elasticdash/tracing";

async function main() {
  await startActiveObservation("user-query-trace", async (span) => {
    span.update({
      input: { query: "What is the capital of France?" },
      output: { answer: "Paris" },
    });
  });
}

// Shutdown flushes events (required for short-lived apps)
main().finally(() => sdk.shutdown());
```

**5. Run and see your trace:**

```bash
npx tsx index.ts
```

---

## Installation

### Python SDK

Install the ElasticDash Python SDK from PyPI:

```bash
pip install elasticdash
```

**Requirements:**
- Python 3.8 or higher
- Compatible with async/await patterns

### JavaScript/TypeScript SDK

The ElasticDash JS/TS SDK is modular. Install the packages you need:

**Basic tracing setup:**

```bash
npm install @elasticdash/tracing @elasticdash/otel @opentelemetry/sdk-node
```

**All available packages:**

| Package | Description | Environment |
|---------|-------------|-------------|
| **`@elasticdash/core`** | Core utilities, types, and logger shared across packages | Universal JS |
| **`@elasticdash/client`** | Client for querying traces, sessions, and scores | Universal JS |
| **`@elasticdash/tracing`** | Core OpenTelemetry-based tracing functions | Universal JS |
| **`@elasticdash/otel`** | `ElasticDashSpanProcessor` to export traces to Logger | Node.js ≥ 20 |
| **`@elasticdash/openai`** | Automatic tracing for OpenAI SDK | Universal JS |
| **`@elasticdash/langchain`** | CallbackHandler for LangChain applications | Universal JS |

**Install specific integrations:**

```bash
# For OpenAI integration
npm install @elasticdash/openai

# For LangChain integration
npm install @elasticdash/langchain

# For querying data
npm install @elasticdash/client
```

---

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

Both SDKs support configuration via environment variables:

```bash
# Required
ELASTICDASH_PUBLIC_KEY="pk-ed-..."
ELASTICDASH_SECRET_KEY="sk-ed-..."

# Required for self-hosted Logger
ELASTICDASH_BASE_URL="https://logger.your-elasticdash.com"
```

### Python: Client Initialization

**Using environment variables (recommended):**

```python
from elasticdash import get_client

# Automatically uses environment variables
elasticdash = get_client()

# Verify connection
if elasticdash.auth_check():
    print("ElasticDash client authenticated!")
else:
    print("Authentication failed")
```

**Using constructor:**

```python
from elasticdash import ElasticDash

elasticdash = ElasticDash(
    public_key="pk-ed-...",
    secret_key="sk-ed-...",
    base_url="https://logger.your-elasticdash.com"
)
```

The ElasticDash client is a singleton. Access it anywhere with `get_client()`.

### JavaScript/TypeScript: Client Initialization

**Using environment variables:**

```typescript
import { ElasticDashClient } from "@elasticdash/client";

// Automatically uses environment variables
const elasticdash = new ElasticDashClient();
```

**Using constructor:**

```typescript
import { ElasticDashClient } from "@elasticdash/client";

const elasticdash = new ElasticDashClient({
  publicKey: "pk-ed-...",
  secretKey: "sk-ed-...",
  baseUrl: "https://logger.your-elasticdash.com"
});
```

---

## Basic Usage

### Creating Traces

**Python:**

```python
from elasticdash import get_client

elasticdash = get_client()

# Context manager (recommended)
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="span",
    name="my-operation"
) as span:
    span.update(
        input="Input data",
        output="Output data",
        metadata={"user": "alice"}
    )
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import { startActiveObservation } from "@elasticdash/tracing";

await startActiveObservation("my-operation", async (span) => {
  span.update({
    input: "Input data",
    output: "Output data",
    metadata: { user: "alice" }
  });
});
```

### Recording LLM Generations

**Python:**

```python
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="generation",
    name="gpt-4-call",
    model="gpt-4"
) as generation:
    # Your OpenAI call
    response = openai_client.chat.completions.create(
        model="gpt-4",
        messages=[{"role": "user", "content": "Hello"}]
    )

    generation.update(
        input={"messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "Hello"}]},
        output={"content": response.choices[0].message.content},
        usage={
            "prompt_tokens": response.usage.prompt_tokens,
            "completion_tokens": response.usage.completion_tokens,
            "total_tokens": response.usage.total_tokens
        }
    )
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import { startObservation } from "@elasticdash/tracing";

const generation = startObservation(
  "gpt-4-call",
  {
    model: "gpt-4",
    input: { messages: [{ role: "user", content: "Hello" }] }
  },
  { asType: "generation" }
);

// Your OpenAI call
const response = await openai.chat.completions.create({
  model: "gpt-4",
  messages: [{ role: "user", content: "Hello" }]
});

generation.update({
  output: { content: response.choices[0].message.content },
  usage: {
    promptTokens: response.usage.prompt_tokens,
    completionTokens: response.usage.completion_tokens
  }
}).end();
```

### Nested Observations

**Python:**

```python
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="span",
    name="parent-operation"
) as parent:

    # Child observation 1
    with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
        as_type="span",
        name="child-1"
    ) as child1:
        child1.update(output="Child 1 complete")

    # Child observation 2
    with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
        as_type="generation",
        name="child-2",
        model="gpt-4"
    ) as child2:
        child2.update(output="Child 2 complete")

    parent.update(output="Parent complete")
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
await startActiveObservation("parent-operation", async (parent) => {

  // Child observation 1
  const child1 = startObservation("child-1", {}, { asType: "span" });
  child1.update({ output: "Child 1 complete" }).end();

  // Child observation 2
  const child2 = startObservation(
    "child-2",
    { model: "gpt-4" },
    { asType: "generation" }
  );
  child2.update({ output: "Child 2 complete" }).end();

  parent.update({ output: "Parent complete" });
});
```

### Adding Metadata and Tags

**Python:**

```python
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="span",
    name="operation",
    user_id="user-123",
    session_id="session-456",
    tags=["production", "experiment-A"],
    metadata={
        "customer_tier": "premium",
        "region": "us-east-1"
    }
) as span:
    span.update(output="Complete")
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
await startActiveObservation("operation", async (span) => {
  span.update({
    userId: "user-123",
    sessionId: "session-456",
    tags: ["production", "experiment-A"],
    metadata: {
      customerTier: "premium",
      region: "us-east-1"
    },
    output: "Complete"
  });
});
```

---

## Flushing Events

For short-lived applications (scripts, serverless functions), you must flush events before the process exits to ensure all traces are sent.

**Python:**

```python
from elasticdash import get_client

elasticdash = get_client()

# Your tracing code here
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="span",
    name="script-task"
) as span:
    span.update(output="Task complete")

# Flush before exit (blocks until all events sent)
elasticdash.flush()
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import { sdk } from "./instrumentation";
import { startActiveObservation } from "@elasticdash/tracing";

async function main() {
  await startActiveObservation("script-task", async (span) => {
    span.update({ output: "Task complete" });
  });
}

// Shutdown before exit (flushes all events)
main().finally(() => sdk.shutdown());
```

**When to flush:**
- ✅ Scripts and CLI tools
- ✅ Serverless functions (Lambda, Cloud Functions)
- ✅ Batch jobs and cron tasks
- ❌ Long-running servers (automatic background flushing)

---

## Framework Integrations

### OpenAI SDK Integration

**Python:**

```python
from elasticdash.openai import openai

# Use the wrapped OpenAI client (drop-in replacement)
completion = openai.chat.completions.create(
    name="chat-completion",
    model="gpt-4",
    messages=[{"role": "user", "content": "Hello"}],
    metadata={"user_id": "alice"}
)

# Automatically traced in ElasticDash!
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import OpenAI from "openai";
import { observeOpenAI } from "@elasticdash/openai";

// Wrap your OpenAI client
const openai = observeOpenAI(new OpenAI());

// Use normally - automatically traced
const response = await openai.chat.completions.create({
  model: "gpt-4",
  messages: [{ role: "user", content: "Hello" }]
});
```

### LangChain Integration

**Python:**

```python
from elasticdash.langchain import CallbackHandler
from langchain_openai import ChatOpenAI
from langchain_core.prompts import ChatPromptTemplate

# Initialize callback handler
elasticdash_handler = CallbackHandler()

# Use with LangChain
llm = ChatOpenAI(model_name="gpt-4")
prompt = ChatPromptTemplate.from_template("Tell me about {topic}")
chain = prompt | llm

response = chain.invoke(
    {"topic": "machine learning"},
    config={"callbacks": [elasticdash_handler]}
)
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import { CallbackHandler } from "@elasticdash/langchain";
import { ChatOpenAI } from "@langchain/openai";

// Initialize callback handler
const elasticdashHandler = new CallbackHandler();

// Use with LangChain
const llm = new ChatOpenAI({ model: "gpt-4" });

const response = await llm.invoke(
  [{ role: "user", content: "Tell me about machine learning" }],
  { callbacks: [elasticdashHandler] }
);
```

---

## OpenTelemetry Foundation

ElasticDash SDKs are built on [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/), providing:

- **Standardization** with the observability ecosystem
- **Context propagation** for nested spans across async workloads
- **Attribute propagation** for metadata, tags, user IDs, etc.
- **Interoperability** with third-party OTel instrumentations

**Mapping:**

| OpenTelemetry | ElasticDash |
|---------------|-------------|
| OTel Trace | ElasticDash Trace |
| OTel Span | ElasticDash Observation (Span/Generation/Event) |
| Span Attributes | Trace/Observation metadata, tags, user_id |

---

## Advanced Features

### Querying Data via SDK

**Python:**

```python
from elasticdash import get_client

elasticdash = get_client()

# Fetch traces
traces = elasticdash.api.trace.list(
    user_id="user-123",
    limit=100
)

# Fetch single trace
trace = elasticdash.api.trace.get("trace-id-abc")

# Fetch observations
observations = elasticdash.api.observations_v_2.get_many(
    trace_id="trace-id-abc",
    type="GENERATION"
)
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
import { ElasticDashClient } from "@elasticdash/client";

const elasticdash = new ElasticDashClient();

// Fetch traces
const traces = await elasticdash.api.trace.list({
  userId: "user-123",
  limit: 100
});

// Fetch single trace
const trace = await elasticdash.api.trace.get("trace-id-abc");

// Fetch observations
const observations = await elasticdash.api.observationsV2.getMany({
  traceId: "trace-id-abc",
  type: "GENERATION"
});
```

### Custom Observation Types

**Python:**

```python
# Record an event (point in time, no duration)
with elasticdash.start_as_current_observation(
    as_type="event",
    name="cache-hit"
) as event:
    event.update(metadata={"cache_key": "user-123-query"})
```

**TypeScript:**

```typescript
// Record an event
const event = startObservation(
  "cache-hit",
  { metadata: { cacheKey: "user-123-query" } },
  { asType: "event" }
);
event.end();
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Authentication Errors

**Problem:** SDK cannot connect to ElasticDash Logger

**Solution:**

```python
# Python: Check authentication
from elasticdash import get_client

elasticdash = get_client()
if not elasticdash.auth_check():
    print("Check your credentials and base URL")
```

### Traces Not Appearing

**Problem:** Traces not visible in Logger UI

**Solutions:**

1. **Flush events** in short-lived apps:
   ```python
   elasticdash.flush()  # Python
   ```
   ```typescript
   sdk.shutdown()  // TypeScript
   ```

2. **Check base URL** - Ensure `ELASTICDASH_BASE_URL` points to your Logger

3. **Wait 15-30 seconds** - Data may take time to process

### Import Errors (TypeScript)

**Problem:** Cannot find module `@elasticdash/tracing`

**Solution:** Ensure OpenTelemetry SDK is installed:

```bash
npm install @opentelemetry/sdk-node
```

---

## See Also

- [Data Model Reference](./data-model.md) - Understanding traces, sessions, observations
- [Fetching Data](./fetching-data.md) - Query Logger for traces and sessions
- [Architecture Overview](./architecture.md) - How ElasticDash components work together
